<!-- DO NOT EDIT THIS FILE.

This file is periodically generated from the content in the `/src/`
directory, so all fixes need to be made in `/src/`.
-->

[TOC]

# Generic Types, Traits, and Lifetimes

Every programming language has tools for effectively handling the duplication of concepts. In Rust, one such tool is *generics*: abstract stand-ins for concrete types or other properties. We can express the behavior of generics or how they relate to other generics without knowing what will be in their place when compiling and running the code.

Functions can take parameters of some generic type, instead of a concrete type like `i32` or `String`, in the same way they take parameters with unknown values to run the same code on multiple concrete values. In fact, we’ve already used generics in Chapter 6 with `Option<T>`, in Chapter 8 with `Vec<T>` and `HashMap<K, V>`, and in Chapter 9 with `Result<T, E>`. In this chapter, you’ll explore how to define your own types, functions, and methods with generics!

First we’ll review how to extract a function to reduce code duplication. We’ll then use the same technique to make a generic function from two functions that differ only in the types of their parameters. We’ll also explain how to use generic types in struct and enum definitions.

Then you’ll learn how to use *traits* to define behavior in a generic way. You can combine traits with generic types to constrain a generic type to accept only those types that have a particular behavior, as opposed to just any type.

Finally, we’ll discuss *lifetimes*: a variety of generics that give the compiler information about how references relate to each other. Lifetimes allow us to give the compiler enough information about borrowed values so that it can ensure references will be valid in more situations than it could without our help.

## Removing Duplication by Extracting a Function

Generics allow us to replace specific types with a placeholder that represents multiple types to remove code duplication. Before diving into generics syntax, let’s first look at how to remove duplication in a way that doesn’t involve generic types by extracting a function that replaces specific values with a placeholder that represents multiple values. Then we’ll apply the same technique to extract a generic function! By looking at how to recognize duplicated code you can extract into a function, you’ll start to recognize duplicated code that can use generics.

We’ll begin with the short program in Listing 10-1 that finds the largest number in a list.

Filename: src/main.rs

```
fn main() {
  1 let number_list = vec![34, 50, 25, 100, 65];

  2 let mut largest = &number_list[0];

  3 for number in &number_list {
      4 if number > largest {
          5 largest = number;
        }
    }

    println!("The largest number is {largest}");
}
```

Listing 10-1: Finding the largest number in a list of numbers

We store a list of integers in the variable `number_list` [1] and place a reference to the first number in the list in a variable named `largest` [2]. We then iterate through all the numbers in the list [3], and if the current number is greater than the number stored in `largest` [4], we replace the reference in that variable [5]. However, if the current number is less than or equal to the largest number seen so far, the variable doesn’t change, and the code moves on to the next number in the list. After considering all the numbers in the list, `largest` should refer to the largest number, which in this case is 100.

We’ve now been tasked with finding the largest number in two different lists of numbers. To do so, we can choose to duplicate the code in Listing 10-1 and use the same logic at two different places in the program, as shown in Listing 10-2.

Filename: src/main.rs

```
fn main() {
    let number_list = vec![34, 50, 25, 100, 65];

    let mut largest = &number_list[0];

    for number in &number_list {
        if number > largest {
            largest = number;
        }
    }

    println!("The largest number is {largest}");

    let number_list = vec![102, 34, 6000, 89, 54, 2, 43, 8];

    let mut largest = &number_list[0];

    for number in &number_list {
        if number > largest {
            largest = number;
        }
    }

    println!("The largest number is {largest}");
}
```

Listing 10-2: Code to find the largest number in *two* lists of numbers

Although this code works, duplicating code is tedious and error prone. We also have to remember to update the code in multiple places when we want to change it.

To eliminate this duplication, we’ll create an abstraction by defining a function that operates on any list of integers passed in a parameter. This solution makes our code clearer and lets us express the concept of finding the largest number in a list abstractly.

In Listing 10-3, we extract the code that finds the largest number into a function named `largest`. Then we call the function to find the largest number in the two lists from Listing 10-2. We could also use the function on any other list of `i32` values we might have in the future.

Filename: src/main.rs

```
fn largest(list: &[i32]) -> &i32 {
    let mut largest = &list[0];

    for item in list {
        if item > largest {
            largest = item;
        }
    }

    largest
}

fn main() {
    let number_list = vec![34, 50, 25, 100, 65];

    let result = largest(&number_list);
    println!("The largest number is {result}");

    let number_list = vec![102, 34, 6000, 89, 54, 2, 43, 8];

    let result = largest(&number_list);
    println!("The largest number is {result}");
}
```

Listing 10-3: Abstracted code to find the largest number in two lists

The `largest` function has a parameter called `list`, which represents any concrete slice of `i32` values we might pass into the function. As a result, when we call the function, the code runs on the specific values that we pass in.

In summary, here are the steps we took to change the code from Listing 10-2 to Listing 10-3:

1. Identify duplicate code.
1. Extract the duplicate code into the body of the function, and specify the inputs and return values of that code in the function signature.
1. Update the two instances of duplicated code to call the function instead.

Next, we’ll use these same steps with generics to reduce code duplication. In the same way that the function body can operate on an abstract `list` instead of specific values, generics allow code to operate on abstract types.

For example, say we had two functions: one that finds the largest item in a slice of `i32` values and one that finds the largest item in a slice of `char` values. How would we eliminate that duplication? Let’s find out!

## Generic Data Types

We use generics to create definitions for items like function signatures or structs, which we can then use with many different concrete data types. Let’s first look at how to define functions, structs, enums, and methods using generics. Then we’ll discuss how generics affect code performance.

### In Function Definitions

When defining a function that uses generics, we place the generics in the signature of the function where we would usually specify the data types of the parameters and return value. Doing so makes our code more flexible and provides more functionality to callers of our function while preventing code duplication.

Continuing with our `largest` function, Listing 10-4 shows two functions that both find the largest value in a slice. We’ll then combine these into a single function that uses generics.

Filename: src/main.rs

```
fn largest_i32(list: &[i32]) -> &i32 {
    let mut largest = &list[0];

    for item in list {
        if item > largest {
            largest = item;
        }
    }

    largest
}

fn largest_char(list: &[char]) -> &char {
    let mut largest = &list[0];

    for item in list {
        if item > largest {
            largest = item;
        }
    }

    largest
}

fn main() {
    let number_list = vec![34, 50, 25, 100, 65];

    let result = largest_i32(&number_list);
    println!("The largest number is {result}");

    let char_list = vec!['y', 'm', 'a', 'q'];

    let result = largest_char(&char_list);
    println!("The largest char is {result}");
}
```

Listing 10-4: Two functions that differ only in their names and in the types in their signatures

The `largest_i32` function is the one we extracted in Listing 10-3 that finds the largest `i32` in a slice. The `largest_char` function finds the largest `char` in a slice. The function bodies have the same code, so let’s eliminate the duplication by introducing a generic type parameter in a single function.

To parameterize the types in a new single function, we need to name the type parameter, just as we do for the value parameters to a function. You can use any identifier as a type parameter name. But we’ll use `T` because, by convention, type parameter names in Rust are short, often just one letter, and Rust’s type-naming convention is CamelCase. Short for *type*, `T` is the default choice of most Rust programmers.

When we use a parameter in the body of the function, we have to declare the parameter name in the signature so the compiler knows what that name means. Similarly, when we use a type parameter name in a function signature, we have to declare the type parameter name before we use it. To define the generic `largest` function, we place type name declarations inside angle brackets, `<>`, between the name of the function and the parameter list, like this:

```
fn largest<T>(list: &[T]) -> &T {
```

We read this definition as: the function `largest` is generic over some type `T`. This function has one parameter named `list`, which is a slice of values of type `T`. The `largest` function will return a reference to a value of the same type `T`.

Listing 10-5 shows the combined `largest` function definition using the generic data type in its signature. The listing also shows how we can call the function with either a slice of `i32` values or `char` values. Note that this code won’t compile yet, but we’ll fix it later in this chapter.

Filename: src/main.rs

```
fn largest<T>(list: &[T]) -> &T {
    let mut largest = &list[0];

    for item in list {
        if item > largest {
            largest = item;
        }
    }

    largest
}

fn main() {
    let number_list = vec![34, 50, 25, 100, 65];

    let result = largest(&number_list);
    println!("The largest number is {result}");

    let char_list = vec!['y', 'm', 'a', 'q'];

    let result = largest(&char_list);
    println!("The largest char is {result}");
}
```

Listing 10-5: The `largest` function using generic type parameters; this doesn’t compile yet

If we compile this code right now, we’ll get this error:

```
error[E0369]: binary operation `>` cannot be applied to type `&T`
 --> src/main.rs:5:17
  |
5 |         if item > largest {
  |            ---- ^ ------- &T
  |            |
  |            &T
  |
help: consider restricting type parameter `T`
  |
1 | fn largest<T: std::cmp::PartialOrd>(list: &[T]) -> &T {
  |             +++++++++++++++++++++++++     ++          ++          ++
```

The help text reveals that the return type needs a generic lifetime parameter on it because Rust can’t tell whether the reference being returned refers to `x` or `y`. Actually, we don’t know either, because the `if` block in the body of this function returns a reference to `x` and the `else` block returns a reference to `y`!

When we’re defining this function, we don’t know the concrete values that will be passed into this function, so we don’t know whether the `if` case or the `else` case will execute. We also don’t know the concrete lifetimes of the references that will be passed in, so we can’t look at the scopes as we did in Listings 10-17 and 10-18 to determine whether the reference we return will always be valid. The borrow checker can’t determine this either, because it doesn’t know how the lifetimes of `x` and `y` relate to the lifetime of the return value. To fix this error, we’ll add generic lifetime parameters that define the relationship between the references so the borrow checker can perform its analysis.

### Lifetime Annotation Syntax

Lifetime annotations don’t change how long any of the references live. Rather, they describe the relationships of the lifetimes of multiple references to each other without affecting the lifetimes. Just as functions can accept any type when the signature specifies a generic type parameter, functions can accept references with any lifetime by specifying a generic lifetime parameter.

Lifetime annotations have a slightly unusual syntax: the names of lifetime parameters must start with an apostrophe (`'`) and are usually all lowercase and very short, like generic types. Most people use the name `'a` for the first lifetime annotation. We place lifetime parameter annotations after the `&` of a reference, using a space to separate the annotation from the reference’s type.

Here are some examples: a reference to an `i32` without a lifetime parameter, a reference to an `i32` that has a lifetime parameter named `'a`, and a mutable reference to an `i32` that also has the lifetime `'a`.

```
&i32        // a reference
&'a i32     // a reference with an explicit lifetime
&'a mut i32 // a mutable reference with an explicit lifetime
```

One lifetime annotation by itself doesn’t have much meaning because the annotations are meant to tell Rust how generic lifetime parameters of multiple references relate to each other. Let’s examine how the lifetime annotations relate to each other in the context of the `longest` function.

### Lifetime Annotations in Function Signatures

To use lifetime annotations in function signatures, we need to declare the generic *lifetime* parameters inside angle brackets between the function name and the parameter list, just as we did with generic *type* parameters.

We want the signature to express the following constraint: the returned reference will be valid as long as both the parameters are valid. This is the relationship between lifetimes of the parameters and the return value. We’ll name the lifetime `'a` and then add it to each reference, as shown in Listing 10-21.

Filename: src/main.rs

```
fn longest<'a>(x: &'a str, y: &'a str) -> &'a str {
    if x.len() > y.len() {
        x
    } else {
        y
    }
}
```

Listing 10-21: The `longest` function definition specifying that all the references in the signature must have the same lifetime `'a`

This code should compile and produce the result we want when we use it with the `main` function in Listing 10-19.

The function signature now tells Rust that for some lifetime `'a`, the function takes two parameters, both of which are string slices that live at least as long as lifetime `'a`. The function signature also tells Rust that the string slice returned from the function will live at least as long as lifetime `'a`. In practice, it means that the lifetime of the reference returned by the `longest` function is the same as the smaller of the lifetimes of the values referred to by the function arguments. These relationships are what we want Rust to use when analyzing this code.

Remember, when we specify the lifetime parameters in this function signature, we’re not changing the lifetimes of any values passed in or returned. Rather, we’re specifying that the borrow checker should reject any values that don’t adhere to these constraints. Note that the `longest` function doesn’t need to know exactly how long `x` and `y` will live, only that some scope can be substituted for `'a` that will satisfy this signature.

When annotating lifetimes in functions, the annotations go in the function signature, not in the function body. The lifetime annotations become part of the contract of the function, much like the types in the signature. Having function signatures contain the lifetime contract means the analysis the Rust compiler does can be simpler. If there’s a problem with the way a function is annotated or the way it is called, the compiler errors can point to the part of our code and the constraints more precisely. If, instead, the Rust compiler made more inferences about what we intended the relationships of the lifetimes to be, the compiler might only be able to point to a use of our code many steps away from the cause of the problem.

When we pass concrete references to `longest`, the concrete lifetime that is substituted for `'a` is the part of the scope of `x` that overlaps with the scope of `y`. In other words, the generic lifetime `'a` will get the concrete lifetime that is equal to the smaller of the lifetimes of `x` and `y`. Because we’ve annotated the returned reference with the same lifetime parameter `'a`, the returned reference will also be valid for the length of the smaller of the lifetimes of `x` and `y`.

Let’s look at how the lifetime annotations restrict the `longest` function by passing in references that have different concrete lifetimes. Listing 10-22 is a straightforward example.

Filename: src/main.rs

```
fn main() {
    let string1 = String::from("long string is long");

    {
        let string2 = String::from("xyz");
        let result = longest(string1.as_str(), string2.as_str());
        println!("The longest string is {result}");
    }
}
```

Listing 10-22: Using the `longest` function with references to `String` values that have different concrete lifetimes

In this example, `string1` is valid until the end of the outer scope, `string2` is valid until the end of the inner scope, and `result` references something that is valid until the end of the inner scope. Run this code and you’ll see that the borrow checker approves; it will compile and print `The longest string
is long string is long`.

Next, let’s try an example that shows that the lifetime of the reference in `result` must be the smaller lifetime of the two arguments. We’ll move the declaration of the `result` variable outside the inner scope but leave the assignment of the value to the `result` variable inside the scope with `string2`. Then we’ll move the `println!` that uses `result` to outside the inner scope, after the inner scope has ended. The code in Listing 10-23 will not compile.

Filename: src/main.rs

```
fn main() {
    let string1 = String::from("long string is long");
    let result;
    {
        let string2 = String::from("xyz");
        result = longest(string1.as_str(), string2.as_str());
    }
    println!("The longest string is {result}");
}
```

Listing 10-23: Attempting to use `result` after `string2` has gone out of scope

When we try to compile this code, we get this error:

```
error[E0597]: `string2` does not live long enough
 --> src/main.rs:6:44
  |
6 |         result = longest(string1.as_str(), string2.as_str());
  |                                            ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^ borrowed value
does not live long enough
7 |     }
  |     - `string2` dropped here while still borrowed
8 |     println!("The longest string is {result}");
  |                                      ------ borrow later used here
```

The error shows that for `result` to be valid for the `println!` statement, `string2` would need to be valid until the end of the outer scope. Rust knows this because we annotated the lifetimes of the function parameters and return values using the same lifetime parameter `'a`.

As humans, we can look at this code and see that `string1` is longer than `string2`, and therefore, `result` will contain a reference to `string1`. Because `string1` has not gone out of scope yet, a reference to `string1` will still be valid for the `println!` statement. However, the compiler can’t see that the reference is valid in this case. We’ve told Rust that the lifetime of the reference returned by the `longest` function is the same as the smaller of the lifetimes of the references passed in. Therefore, the borrow checker disallows the code in Listing 10-23 as possibly having an invalid reference.

Try designing more experiments that vary the values and lifetimes of the references passed in to the `longest` function and how the returned reference is used. Make hypotheses about whether or not your experiments will pass the borrow checker before you compile; then check to see if you’re right!

### Thinking in Terms of Lifetimes

The way in which you need to specify lifetime parameters depends on what your function is doing. For example, if we changed the implementation of the `longest` function to always return the first parameter rather than the longest string slice, we wouldn’t need to specify a lifetime on the `y` parameter. The following code will compile:

Filename: src/main.rs

```
fn longest<'a>(x: &'a str, y: &str) -> &'a str {
    x
}
```

We’ve specified a lifetime parameter `'a` for the parameter `x` and the return type, but not for the parameter `y`, because the lifetime of `y` does not have any relationship with the lifetime of `x` or the return value.

When returning a reference from a function, the lifetime parameter for the return type needs to match the lifetime parameter for one of the parameters. If the reference returned does *not* refer to one of the parameters, it must refer to a value created within this function. However, this would be a dangling reference because the value will go out of scope at the end of the function. Consider this attempted implementation of the `longest` function that won’t compile:

Filename: src/main.rs

```
fn longest<'a>(x: &str, y: &str) -> &'a str {
    let result = String::from("really long string");
    result.as_str()
}
```

Here, even though we’ve specified a lifetime parameter `'a` for the return type, this implementation will fail to compile because the return value lifetime is not related to the lifetime of the parameters at all. Here is the error message we get:

```
error[E0515]: cannot return reference to local variable `result`
  --> src/main.rs:11:5
   |
11 |     result.as_str()
   |     ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^ returns a reference to data owned by the
current function
```

The problem is that `result` goes out of scope and gets cleaned up at the end of the `longest` function. We’re also trying to return a reference to `result` from the function. There is no way we can specify lifetime parameters that would change the dangling reference, and Rust won’t let us create a dangling reference. In this case, the best fix would be to return an owned data type rather than a reference so the calling function is then responsible for cleaning up the value.

Ultimately, lifetime syntax is about connecting the lifetimes of various parameters and return values of functions. Once they’re connected, Rust has enough information to allow memory-safe operations and disallow operations that would create dangling pointers or otherwise violate memory safety.

### Lifetime Annotations in Struct Definitions

So far, the structs we’ve defined all hold owned types. We can define structs to hold references, but in that case we would need to add a lifetime annotation on every reference in the struct’s definition. Listing 10-24 has a struct named `ImportantExcerpt` that holds a string slice.

Filename: src/main.rs

```
1 struct ImportantExcerpt<'a> {
  2 part: &'a str,
}

fn main() {
  3 let novel = String::from(
        "Call me Ishmael. Some years ago..."
    );
  4 let first_sentence = novel
        .split('.')
        .next()
        .expect("Could not find a '.'");
  5 let i = ImportantExcerpt {
        part: first_sentence,
    };
}
```

Listing 10-24: A struct that holds a reference, requiring a lifetime annotation

This struct has the single field `part` that holds a string slice, which is a reference [2]. As with generic data types, we declare the name of the generic lifetime parameter inside angle brackets after the name of the struct so we can use the lifetime parameter in the body of the struct definition [1]. This annotation means an instance of `ImportantExcerpt` can’t outlive the reference it holds in its `part` field.

The `main` function here creates an instance of the `ImportantExcerpt` struct [5] that holds a reference to the first sentence of the `String` [4] owned by the variable `novel` [3]. The data in `novel` exists before the `ImportantExcerpt` instance is created. In addition, `novel` doesn’t go out of scope until after the `ImportantExcerpt` goes out of scope, so the reference in the `ImportantExcerpt` instance is valid.

### Lifetime Elision

You’ve learned that every reference has a lifetime and that you need to specify lifetime parameters for functions or structs that use references. However, we had a function in Listing 4-9, shown again in Listing 10-25, that compiled without lifetime annotations.

Filename: src/lib.rs

```
fn first_word(s: &str) -> &str {
    let bytes = s.as_bytes();

    for (i, &item) in bytes.iter().enumerate() {
        if item == b' ' {
            return &s[0..i];
        }
    }

    &s[..]
}
```

Listing 10-25: A function we defined in Listing 4-9 that compiled without lifetime annotations, even though the parameter and return type are references

The reason this function compiles without lifetime annotations is historical: in early versions (pre-1.0) of Rust, this code wouldn’t have compiled because every reference needed an explicit lifetime. At that time, the function signature would have been written like this:

```
fn first_word<'a>(s: &'a str) -> &'a str {
```

After writing a lot of Rust code, the Rust team found that Rust programmers were entering the same lifetime annotations over and over in particular situations. These situations were predictable and followed a few deterministic patterns. The developers programmed these patterns into the compiler’s code so the borrow checker could infer the lifetimes in these situations and wouldn’t need explicit annotations.

This piece of Rust history is relevant because it’s possible that more deterministic patterns will emerge and be added to the compiler. In the future, even fewer lifetime annotations might be required.

The patterns programmed into Rust’s analysis of references are called the *lifetime elision rules*. These aren’t rules for programmers to follow; they’re a set of particular cases that the compiler will consider, and if your code fits these cases, you don’t need to write the lifetimes explicitly.

The elision rules don’t provide full inference. If Rust deterministically applies the rules but there is still ambiguity as to what lifetimes the references have, the compiler won’t guess what the lifetime of the remaining references should be. Instead of guessing, the compiler will give you an error that you can resolve by adding the lifetime annotations.

Lifetimes on function or method parameters are called *input lifetimes*, and lifetimes on return values are called *output lifetimes*.

The compiler uses three rules to figure out the lifetimes of the references when there aren’t explicit annotations. The first rule applies to input lifetimes, and the second and third rules apply to output lifetimes. If the compiler gets to the end of the three rules and there are still references for which it can’t figure out lifetimes, the compiler will stop with an error. These rules apply to `fn` definitions as well as `impl` blocks.

The first rule is that the compiler assigns a lifetime parameter to each parameter that’s a reference. In other words, a function with one parameter gets one lifetime parameter: `fn foo<'a>(x: &'a i32)`; a function with two parameters gets two separate lifetime parameters: `fn foo<'a, 'b>(x: &'a i32,
y: &'b i32)`; and so on.

The second rule is that, if there is exactly one input lifetime parameter, that lifetime is assigned to all output lifetime parameters: `fn foo<'a>(x: &'a i32)
-> &'a i32`.

The third rule is that, if there are multiple input lifetime parameters, but one of them is `&self` or `&mut self` because this is a method, the lifetime of `self` is assigned to all output lifetime parameters. This third rule makes methods much nicer to read and write because fewer symbols are necessary.

Let’s pretend we’re the compiler. We’ll apply these rules to figure out the lifetimes of the references in the signature of the `first_word` function in Listing 10-25. The signature starts without any lifetimes associated with the references:

```
fn first_word(s: &str) -> &str {
```

Then the compiler applies the first rule, which specifies that each parameter gets its own lifetime. We’ll call it `'a` as usual, so now the signature is this:

```
fn first_word<'a>(s: &'a str) -> &str {
```

The second rule applies because there is exactly one input lifetime. The second rule specifies that the lifetime of the one input parameter gets assigned to the output lifetime, so the signature is now this:

```
fn first_word<'a>(s: &'a str) -> &'a str {
```

Now all the references in this function signature have lifetimes, and the compiler can continue its analysis without needing the programmer to annotate the lifetimes in this function signature.

Let’s look at another example, this time using the `longest` function that had no lifetime parameters when we started working with it in Listing 10-20:

```
fn longest(x: &str, y: &str) -> &str {
```

Let’s apply the first rule: each parameter gets its own lifetime. This time we have two parameters instead of one, so we have two lifetimes:

```
fn longest<'a, 'b>(x: &'a str, y: &'b str) -> &str {
```

You can see that the second rule doesn’t apply because there is more than one input lifetime. The third rule doesn’t apply either, because `longest` is a function rather than a method, so none of the parameters are `self`. After working through all three rules, we still haven’t figured out what the return type’s lifetime is. This is why we got an error trying to compile the code in Listing 10-20: the compiler worked through the lifetime elision rules but still couldn’t figure out all the lifetimes of the references in the signature.

Because the third rule really only applies in method signatures, we’ll look at lifetimes in that context next to see why the third rule means we don’t have to annotate lifetimes in method signatures very often.

### Lifetime Annotations in Method Definitions

When we implement methods on a struct with lifetimes, we use the same syntax as that of generic type parameters shown in Listing 10-11. Where we declare and use the lifetime parameters depends on whether they’re related to the struct fields or the method parameters and return values.

Lifetime names for struct fields always need to be declared after the `impl` keyword and then used after the struct’s name because those lifetimes are part of the struct’s type.

In method signatures inside the `impl` block, references might be tied to the lifetime of references in the struct’s fields, or they might be independent. In addition, the lifetime elision rules often make it so that lifetime annotations aren’t necessary in method signatures. Let’s look at some examples using the struct named `ImportantExcerpt` that we defined in Listing 10-24.

First we’ll use a method named `level` whose only parameter is a reference to `self` and whose return value is an `i32`, which is not a reference to anything:

```
impl<'a> ImportantExcerpt<'a> {
    fn level(&self) -> i32 {
        3
    }
}
```

The lifetime parameter declaration after `impl` and its use after the type name are required, but we’re not required to annotate the lifetime of the reference to `self` because of the first elision rule.

Here is an example where the third lifetime elision rule applies:

```
impl<'a> ImportantExcerpt<'a> {
    fn announce_and_return_part(&self, announcement: &str) -> &str {
        println!("Attention please: {announcement}");
        self.part
    }
}
```

There are two input lifetimes, so Rust applies the first lifetime elision rule and gives both `&self` and `announcement` their own lifetimes. Then, because one of the parameters is `&self`, the return type gets the lifetime of `&self`, and all lifetimes have been accounted for.

### The Static Lifetime

One special lifetime we need to discuss is `'static`, which denotes that the affected reference *can* live for the entire duration of the program. All string literals have the `'static` lifetime, which we can annotate as follows:

```
let s: &'static str = "I have a static lifetime.";
```

The text of this string is stored directly in the program’s binary, which is always available. Therefore, the lifetime of all string literals is `'static`.

You might see suggestions to use the `'static` lifetime in error messages. But before specifying `'static` as the lifetime for a reference, think about whether the reference you have actually lives the entire lifetime of your program or not, and whether you want it to. Most of the time, an error message suggesting the `'static` lifetime results from attempting to create a dangling reference or a mismatch of the available lifetimes. In such cases, the solution is to fix those problems, not to specify the `'static` lifetime.

## Generic Type Parameters, Trait Bounds, and Lifetimes Together

Let’s briefly look at the syntax of specifying generic type parameters, trait bounds, and lifetimes all in one function!

```
use std::fmt::Display;

fn longest_with_an_announcement<'a, T>(
    x: &'a str,
    y: &'a str,
    ann: T,
) -> &'a str
where
    T: Display,
{
    println!("Announcement! {ann}");
    if x.len() > y.len() {
        x
    } else {
        y
    }
}
```

This is the `longest` function from Listing 10-21 that returns the longer of two string slices. But now it has an extra parameter named `ann` of the generic type `T`, which can be filled in by any type that implements the `Display` trait as specified by the `where` clause. This extra parameter will be printed using `{}`, which is why the `Display` trait bound is necessary. Because lifetimes are a type of generic, the declarations of the lifetime parameter `'a` and the generic type parameter `T` go in the same list inside the angle brackets after the function name.

## Summary

We covered a lot in this chapter! Now that you know about generic type parameters, traits and trait bounds, and generic lifetime parameters, you’re ready to write code without repetition that works in many different situations. Generic type parameters let you apply the code to different types. Traits and trait bounds ensure that even though the types are generic, they’ll have the behavior the code needs. You learned how to use lifetime annotations to ensure that this flexible code won’t have any dangling references. And all of this analysis happens at compile time, which doesn’t affect runtime performance!

Believe it or not, there is much more to learn on the topics we discussed in this chapter: Chapter 17 discusses trait objects, which are another way to use traits. There are also more complex scenarios involving lifetime annotations that you will only need in very advanced scenarios; for those, you should read the Rust Reference at *https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/trait-bounds.html*. But next, you’ll learn how to write tests in Rust so you can make sure your code is working the way it should.

